Extractor Architecture
======================

The extraction framework is responsible for converting GONet observations
into structured records through a collection of independent extractor
components.

Each extractor contributes a specific subset of information, such as file
metadata, timestamps, weather conditions, astronomical quantities, geometry
parameters, or pixel-value measurements.

The final extraction record is assembled by combining the outputs of all
participating extractors.

This architecture makes it easy to:

* Extend the extraction system.
* Add new output quantities.
* Reuse extraction logic.
* Keep extraction code modular and maintainable.

See also:

* :doc:`extraction tool guide <../tools/extract_measurements>`
* :doc:`extraction API reference <../api_reference/extraction>`


Key Code Paths
--------------

The extraction architecture is implemented across the extractor package and the
interactive extraction app.

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 45 55

   * - File or module
     - Role
   * - ``GONet_Wizard/GONet_utils/src/extractors/core.py``
     - Base extractor abstractions and dependency declarations.
   * - ``GONet_Wizard/GONet_utils/src/extractors/runner.py``
     - Orchestrates extractor execution.
   * - ``GONet_Wizard/GONet_utils/src/extractors/merge.py``
     - Combines extractor result dictionaries into output records.
   * - ``GONet_Wizard/GONet_utils/src/extractors/file_info.py``
     - Reads file-level metadata and provides shared observation context.
   * - ``GONet_Wizard/GONet_utils/src/extractors/time_info.py``
     - Adds UTC/local time and MJD fields.
   * - ``GONet_Wizard/GONet_utils/src/extractors/weather_info.py``
     - Adds weather fields when available.
   * - ``GONet_Wizard/GONet_utils/src/extractors/astro_info.py``
     - Adds solar and lunar quantities.
   * - ``GONet_Wizard/GONet_utils/src/extractors/extraction_values.py``
     - Computes channel statistics inside the selected region.
   * - ``GONet_Wizard/GONet_utils/src/extract_app/shapes/``
     - Defines geometric region classes used by extraction.

Important concepts include ``USES``, ``PROVIDES``, ``raw``, ``context``,
extractor result dictionaries, and the final merged JSON/CSV record.

For generated API documentation, see :doc:`extraction API reference <../api_reference/extraction>`.

Overview
--------

An extraction begins with:

* One or more GONet observations.
* Extraction configuration parameters.
* A collection of extractors.

Depending on the selected extractors, an extraction region may or may not
be required.

Each extractor computes a specific subset of the final output.

Conceptually, the extraction pipeline is:

.. code-block:: text

   GONetFile
        +
   Extraction Region
        |
        v

   FileInfo
    │
    └── provides "time"
            │
            ├── TimeInfo
            ├── WeatherInfo
            └── AstroInfo

    ShapeInfo
    ExtractionValues

        |
        v

   Merged Output Dictionary

        |
        +--> JSON Output
        |
        +--> CSV Output

The execution order is determined from declared dependencies rather than
hard-coded sequencing.

For example, the astronomical, weather, and time extractors all require a
valid observation time. That time is provided by the file-information
extractor, so the file-information extractor must execute first.

Once the time information is available in the shared context, the dependent
extractors may execute.

The final extraction record is produced by merging the output dictionaries
returned by each extractor.

Metadata vs Region-Based Extractors
-----------------------------------

Not every extractor requires an extraction region.

Many extractors operate exclusively on image metadata and can produce useful
results without examining any pixels. Examples include the file-information,
time, weather, and astronomical extractors.

Only a subset of extractors, such as the extraction-values extractor,
require a geometric region in order to compute pixel-based measurements.

The extraction framework therefore supports both metadata-only extraction
and region-based measurement workflows.

Why Extractors?
---------------

The extractor framework was designed to separate independent concerns that
would otherwise accumulate inside a single monolithic extraction routine.

For example:

* Time conversion logic belongs in the time extractor.
* Weather retrieval belongs in the weather extractor.
* Astronomical calculations belong in the astronomical extractor.
* Pixel statistics belong in the extraction-values extractor.

By isolating these responsibilities, individual components can be developed,
tested, and extended independently.

Context-Based Execution
-----------------------

The extraction framework is built around two shared data structures:

``raw``
   Input information supplied to the extraction pipeline.

``context``
   Intermediate information generated by extractors and shared with other
   extractors.

Every extractor receives both objects:

.. code-block:: python

   extract(raw, context)

and returns:

.. code-block:: python

   results, context

The ``results`` dictionary contributes fields to the final extraction output,
while the ``context`` dictionary allows extractors to exchange intermediate
information.

This design allows extractors to remain largely independent while still
supporting complex workflows involving shared computations.

Dependency Example
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The standard extraction pipeline contains several extractors that depend on
observation timestamps.

Conceptually:

.. code-block:: text

   FileInfo
      |
      +--> provides "time"
                |
                +--> TimeInfo
                +--> WeatherInfo
                +--> AstroInfo

The ``FileInfo`` extractor reads timestamps from the image files and stores
them in the shared context.

The ``TimeInfo`` extractor uses those timestamps to generate UTC, local time,
and Modified Julian Date fields.

The ``WeatherInfo`` extractor uses the same timestamps to retrieve matching
weather records.

The ``AstroInfo`` extractor uses the same timestamps to compute solar and
lunar information.

Without the shared ``time`` context value, none of these extractors could
operate.

Design Philosophy
-----------------

The extraction framework follows a composition-based design.

Rather than creating a single monolithic extractor responsible for every
output field, the framework divides responsibilities among specialized
components.

Each extractor is responsible for one logical category of information.

Benefits of this design include:

* Simpler code.
* Easier testing.
* Better separation of concerns.
* Straightforward extension of the extraction system.

Extractor Dependencies
----------------------

Extractors may depend on information generated by other extractors.

Dependencies are declared through two class attributes:

``USES``
   Context keys required by the extractor.

``PROVIDES``
   Context keys generated by the extractor.

For example:

.. code-block:: python

   class TimeInfo(Extractor):

       USES = ["time"]
       PROVIDES = []

An extractor may only run once all of its required ``USES`` keys are
available in the shared context.

Likewise, extractors that generate intermediate context values declare those
values through ``PROVIDES``.

These declarations allow the extraction framework to automatically determine
a valid execution order.

.. note::

   The shared ``time`` value is the most common dependency in the standard
   pipeline, but the dependency mechanism is not limited to timestamps.

   The dependency mechanism is intentionally generic. The framework does not
   contain any special handling for timestamps or weather information. Any
   extractor may declare context dependencies, and the dependency resolver will
   incorporate them into the execution graph automatically.

   Any extractor may provide context values that can be reused by other
   extractors. The framework resolves these relationships automatically using
   the declared ``USES`` and ``PROVIDES`` fields.

Automatic Dependency Resolution
-------------------------------

The extraction framework does not rely on a manually maintained execution
order.

Instead, extractors are topologically sorted according to their declared
``USES`` and ``PROVIDES`` relationships.

This ensures that:

* Required context values exist before they are used.
* New extractors can be added without manually restructuring the pipeline.
* Dependency errors can be detected automatically.

As a result, the extractor list describes *what* each extractor needs and
provides, while the framework determines *when* it should execute.

Standard Extractors
-------------------

The following extractors are included with GONet Wizard.

File Information Extractor
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Module:

.. code-block:: text

   extractors/file_info.py

Purpose:

* Filename information.
* Camera identifier.
* Unix timestamps.

Typical fields:

* ``filename``
* ``camera``
* ``unix_time``

Shape Information Extractor
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Module:

.. code-block:: text

   extractors/shape_info.py

Purpose:

Stores the parameters describing the extraction geometry.

Typical fields:

* ``shape``
* ``x0``
* ``y0``
* ``radius``
* ``inner_radius``
* ``outer_radius``
* ``start_angle``
* ``end_angle``

Time Information Extractor
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Module:

.. code-block:: text

   extractors/time_info.py

Purpose:

Converts image timestamps into a variety of useful representations.

Typical fields:

* ``night``
* ``date_utc``
* ``date_local``
* ``mjd``
* ``hours_utc``
* ``hours_local``
* ``float_hours_utc``
* ``float_hours_local``

Weather Information Extractor
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Module:

.. code-block:: text

   extractors/weather_info.py

Purpose:

Retrieves environmental information associated with the observation.

Typical fields:

* ``temperature``
* ``dew_point``
* ``wind_speed``
* ``pressure``
* ``humidity``
* ``condition_code``

Astronomical Information Extractor
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Module:

.. code-block:: text

   extractors/astro_info.py

Purpose:

Computes astronomical quantities associated with the observation.

Typical fields:

* ``sunaltaz``
* ``moonaltaz``
* ``moon_illumination``

Extraction Values Extractor
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Module:

.. code-block:: text

   extractors/extraction_values.py

Purpose:

Performs the actual pixel-value measurements within the extraction region.

Typical fields:

* ``total_counts``
* ``mean_counts``
* ``std``
* ``npixels``

Output Assembly
---------------

Each extractor returns a dictionary containing its contribution to the final
record.

Conceptually:

.. code-block:: python

   {
       "temperature": 27.9,
       "humidity": 54.0,
   }

or

.. code-block:: python

   {
       "red": {
           "total_counts": ...,
           "mean_counts": ...,
       }
   }

The extraction runner combines these dictionaries into a single output record.

The resulting record is then written to either JSON or CSV format.

Output Composition
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Each extractor contributes a subset of the final output record.

For example:

.. code-block:: text

   FileInfo
      -> filename, camera, unix_time

   TimeInfo
      -> date_utc, date_local, mjd

   WeatherInfo
      -> temperature, humidity, pressure

   ExtractionValues
      -> red, green, blue statistics

The extraction runner merges these contributions into a single dictionary,
which is then written to JSON or CSV output.

Extractors generally do not modify fields produced by other extractors.
Instead, they contribute additional information to the growing output record.

Results vs Context
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A useful way to think about the framework is to distinguish between
information intended for the final output and information intended only for
intermediate computation.

``results``
   Quantities that will appear in the final extraction record.

``context``
   Intermediate quantities shared between extractors but not necessarily
   written to the output.

For example, a timestamp may be stored in the context and reused by several
extractors, while the final UTC string, local time, and Modified Julian Date
are written to the results.

JSON vs CSV
~~~~~~~~~~~

JSON preserves the full hierarchical structure of the extraction results.

Example:

.. code-block:: text

   red
     ├── total_counts
     ├── mean_counts
     ├── std
     └── npixels

CSV output flattens nested structures into columns.

Example:

.. code-block:: text

   red_total_counts
   red_mean_counts
   red_std
   red_npixels

The two formats contain the same information but are optimized for different
use cases.

Minimal Extractor Skeleton
--------------------------

A new extractor should normally look like this:

.. code-block:: python

   from GONet_Wizard.GONet_utils.src.extractors.core import Extractor


   class MyExtractor(Extractor):
       USES = ["time"]
       PROVIDES = ["my_context_key"]

       def extract(self, raw, context):
           results = {
               "my_output_field": "...",
           }

           context["my_context_key"] = "..."

           return results, context

The runner uses ``USES`` and ``PROVIDES`` to determine when the extractor can
run. The returned ``results`` are merged into the final JSON/CSV output, while
``context`` carries intermediate values for later extractors.

Adding New Extractors
---------------------

The framework is intentionally designed to be extensible.

A typical extractor defines:

* The context keys it requires through ``USES``.
* The context keys it generates through ``PROVIDES``.
* An ``extract()`` method that computes its results.

When possible, extractors should:

* Have a single responsibility.
* Avoid depending on unrelated extractors.
* Communicate through the shared context rather than direct coupling.
* Return deterministic outputs for identical inputs.

Following these guidelines helps preserve the modular nature of the
framework and keeps dependency graphs easy to understand.

In general, new extractors should focus on a single responsibility and
contribute additional fields to the merged output record.

Keeping extractors independent makes the extraction framework easier to test,
maintain, and extend.

Relationship with the API Reference
-----------------------------------

This page describes the architecture of the extraction framework.

For implementation details and class documentation, see:

* :doc:`extraction API reference <../api_reference/extraction>`

For user-facing extraction workflows, see:

* :doc:`extraction tool guide <../tools/extract_measurements>`
